[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>BEN STEWART: Have
you ever wondered
if anyone or anything has ever
hijacked your decision making?
What if there are
creatures inside your body
that do exactly that?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back to "Limitless."
In this episode, we're
going to be talking
about the holobiosis
and the gut brain,
but I'll start you off with
a quote from Hippocrates.
He says, "All disease
begins in the gut."
I was taught that we have one
brain, the one in our head.
And this brain was
responsible for every decision
I will ever make.
All things that I do
comes back to this brain.
So if I do something,
it's simply
a calculated Ben-brain move.
But this was in the
'90s before the internet
made a lot of new research
readily available.
And what I came to find
is that we are anything
but one single unit of life.
Therefore, we may not be
the only decision maker.
We may be actually closer to
what Rodney Dietert calls,
as the title of his book
suggests, "a Human Super
Organism."
Other researchers are
calling it a holobiont.
A holobiont is a unit of
life that is holistic.
So there's that word again
holobiosis, holobiont.
Holos means whole.
You see this in the word
holistic or holographic.
It represents the
entirety of the system.
So that's holos.
Biont is a unit of life.
But biosis is an
ecosystem of life,
many different organisms making
up one single super organism.
So how do microbes
truly fit the bill
when we're talking about
our human potential?
As we're talking about
who's the decision maker,
we really need to take a
deeper look at microbes.
What are they?
Why might we even
have them in our body?
Well, let's take a look at
a film called "Resistance--
Not All Germs Are
Created Equal."
>> We have a very skewed
sense of our relationship with
microorganisms in general
and bacteria specifically.
They collectively outweigh human
beings by 100 million times.
They can replicate 500,000
times faster than we can.
And they've been doing
this for 1,000 times
longer than our
species has existed.
>>BEN: Very interesting.
These microbes, these
bacteria can rightly
be seen as ancient intelligent
organisms, actually
the most ancient intelligent
organisms on this planet.
So these microbes are so
crucial in every aspect of life
that they are here
to help us thrive.
They're in a lot of
the foods that we eat.
You go to the supermarket.
You see things like kombucha,
yogurt, kimchi, sauerkraut.
These are all fermented foods.
And in these fermented
foods live billions, if not
trillions of microorganisms.
But in the 1900s, there
was this campaign,
a scientific one at that,
saying that bacteria
are bad for your health.
This gave rise to the
campaign of antibiotics,
depleting all the
bacteria in our body.
Scrubbing our hands and making
sure we're squeaky clean.
Mouthwash, making sure
there's no microbes in there
because it was the idea,
bacteria equals bad health.
But now that we actually know
more about these bacteria,
we know that there's good
bacteria and bad bacteria.
There's pathogens, bad bacteria.
And there's probiotics,
good bacteria,
ones that help us digest.
The microbiome,
basically, the catch term
for all the microbes in
our gut, this microbiome
is responsible for roughly 80%
to 90% of our immune system,
keeping us healthy.
All these different
bacterial strains
communicate with one another
through a chemical language.
And with this chemical
language and a process
called quorum
sensing, they can tell
what the populations
of these bacteria are.
If anything's getting
out of control,
they can bring it
back into balance.
If there's a pathogen
or a parasite,
then they can get to action.
These microbes are responsible
for keeping us healthy.
So how far back do these
fermented foods and this idea
of good bacteria truly go?
Well, you can look
back into time
into Western Africa
at the food garri.
It's a root vegetable
called cassava.
And this is a staple
there in Western Africa.
There's also the
Tanzanian togwa which
is a fermented
gruel, which actually
helps people in
malnourished countries
maintain their health.
If you look in Asia, there's
soy beans, seafood, black beans,
fish sauce, and even
side dishes that
are all fermented and have
these good strains of bacteria
in them.
In Europe, you'll see
sourdough and sauerkraut.
Fermentation goes all the
way back to ancient Egypt
and likely beyond.
But what if I were to tell you
that these little critters,
these microbes in our
stomach, they not only
help our immune system.
They not only help
us digest food,
but they also
inform how we feel,
think, and make decisions.
So now let's take a look
at a film called, "The Gut,
Our Second Brain"
by Cécile Denjean.
>> If Leonardo da Vinci
had had the chance to use
the microscope
Michael Gershon uses,
these are some of the
neurons he would've observed.
200 million of these neurons
line our intestine wall.
They spend the length
of our digestive tubes
helping us to digest food.
Our two brains resemble
each other like brothers.
The upper brain houses the
central nervous system,
and the lower brain houses
the enteric nervous system.
>>MICHEL NEUNLIST:
The second brain
has had its name
usurped really because I
consider it to be the first
brain, the original brain even.
Primitive
multicellular organisms
were initially composed
of just a digestive tube.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
The enteric nervous
system developed
within this digestive tube.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
[SWOOSH]
>>BEN: Very peculiar.
Before we even had neurons, or
a nervous system, or a brain,
evolutionarily, the first
gut was the digestive tube.
That's how we learned about
our outside environment.
We would literally swallow it.
Two brains, one in our
gut and one in our head.
They do communicate, and it's
a very important communication
process.
It's called the gut-brain axis.
There's five different channels.
A few of which are the vagus
nerve, the cranial nerve
that wanders outside of
the spinal column; the HPA
axis, which is the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis; and simply through
chemical languages.
We have a lot of
microbes, and they're
communicating a lot of
very useful and valuable
information.
But there was this myth that we
have far more microbial cells
than we do human cells,
meaning far more microbial DNA
in our body than our human DNA.
They've brought that into
balance a little bit more
with this article that
says, "You're Probably
Not Mostly Microbes."
And, in this article,
they did new research,
and they came to find that
it's actually not true.
We are about half human
and half microbial.
Half the cells in our
body are not ours.
So could we rightly
say that these microbes
might be our puppet masters?
They cause us to crave
certain foods that feed them
and create their
optimal environment.
They cause us to behave, and
think, and emote differently.
This is a lot of
power that they have.
And this has been known
for quite some time
that a microbe can
change the behavior
of a macroscopic or higher-order
creature such as the killifish.
There's a very specific
parasite that gets into them.
And when it does, it
causes them to disobey
their primal command.
Their primal command is
swim very low in the water
so none of the predatory birds
can come down and eat you.
Makes sense.
But when infected
with this parasite,
they disobey this command.
They swim in the shallow
water, right towards the top.
Not only that, they
swim very erratically.
They move a lot.
So the sun catches their
scales, and they could
be easier seen by the bird.
So the birds come
down, swoop them up.
Now the parasite
is inside the bird.
The birds drop all of their
waste onto this field.
The cows come by,
eat the grass that
is infected with this parasite.
Now, the parasite
gets to live out
the rest of its illustrious
life in one of those four
stomachs of that cow.
That is smart.
In computer terms,
that fish just
got hacked by that parasite.
And they do this through
chemical languages.
They change the ratio of
these neural chemicals
and the chemistry in our body
to get us to think differently.
Literally, they are
hijacking our thinking.
Let's take a deeper look
at how many of these
bacterial strains
live in our body.
We have many different areas
in which these bacteria live
and many different strains.
For instance, there's
a different strain
of bacteria E. coli on
the bottom of your foot
than on the top of your foot, or
in your forearms, your armpits,
hair follicles, eyes,
mouth, digestive tract,
and even through
your bloodstream.
The unique thing about it
is every single one of us
has a very peculiar
ratio of these strains.
Sometimes we're missing
a strain or two.
Sometimes we have a few
that we shouldn't have.
But we all have our own unique
ratio, which is as unique to us
as our fingerprint is.
There's also an enterotype.
Something that is guided by our
ancestry, meaning our ancestors
passed down these microbes
almost as if they're heirlooms.
Now, how do we pass on our
enterotype to our children
and to their children?
Well, this happens
through the birth canal.
And if you are born
through the birth canal,
you are properly
inoculated by your mother.
You are getting the same
imprint, microbial imprint
as your ancestors did.
But if you are born
by cesarean section,
you may not be properly
seeded or inoculated.
And this has given rise to
a fecal transplant method
that doctors sometimes
are using now
to give children a better start
as it may improve their health.
Another cool fact,
did you know that most
of the dust particles that are
floating around in your house
are dead skin?
And upon that dead skin
live many microorganisms
that come from you
and other people.
What does this mean?
This means that we
actually share microbiomes.
We share bacteria when we don't
even realize we're doing this.
If you're in an elevator--
nobody even has to sneeze--
you're getting their
microbiome in you.
If you're on an airplane and
you're sitting all the way
in the back, you are
sharing the microbiome
of the pilot and the co-pilot.
Another interesting little
point, all of your lovers,
all of your intimate
partners, you share
their microbes in you.
And you share yours
with them for life.
Might want to think about it.
So back to the
holobiont, this idea
that there is one unit of life.
But what is that unit of life?
Are we a single unit of
life if we're constantly
giving microbes out and
getting microbes back.
Well, let's take a look
at a Gaia original series
called "Psychedelica,"
the episode "Psychedelics
and Consciousness" to
answer this question.
>>TERENCE MCKENNA: We are
like an organ of Gaia.
We are the organ which
binds and releases energy.
For reas-- I mean,
a liver cell doesn't
need to understand why
it binds and releases
enzymes of the liver.
We bind and release energy
for reasons perhaps never
to be clear to us
but which place us
firmly within the context
of the Gaian mind.
Suddenly, we come with
an epigenetic capability.
We write books, tell stories,
dance, sing, carve, paint.
These are not genetic processes.
These are epigenetic processes.
And they bind information
and express the Gaian mind.
The Gaian mind is a real mind.
Its messages are real messages.
And our task, through
discipline, psychedelics,
attention to detail,
whatever we have going,
is to try and
extract this message
and eliminate ourselves
from the message
so that we then can see
the face of the other.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>BEN: Gaia.
That word, that Greek word
that means the entire living
planet, this seemingly
single unit of life.
Everything that is on it is
just as dynamic and diverse
as all the constituents
in our human body
that we call me, this
single unit of life.
But if you look at
Gaia, the whole planet,
as a single living
organism, you will actually
be thinking closer to what our
ancestors and shamanic tribes
believed about the planet--
that the entire planet
is conscious, sentient.
It thinks, and we are
merely a cell upon it.
So that person that you
heard in "Psychedelica"
was Terence McKenna,
a psychoanaut, author,
and respected researcher
of psychedelics.
Rest in peace, Terence.
He was looking so deeply
into the question of,
what is consciousness
and how can psychedelics
help us arrive at that answer?
This quest brought he
and his brother, Dennis,
down into the Amazon, where he
found this plant combination.
It was a vine and a leaf,
and only when combined would
the psychedelic properties
start emerging from it.
And the most interesting
thing that I believe he found,
the diet that they would enter
into before drinking ayahuasca
for about a week, or two
weeks, maybe months or years
was the actual medicine.
That their dieta, which
is Spanish for diet,
was the healing tradition,
and ayahuasca was merely
a part of it.
So let's take a deeper look
at this show "Psychedelica,"
another episode
called "Ayahuasca--
Journey into Infinity."
>> The strongest and most
lasting effects neurologically
happen in the gut.
The enteric nervous system
has about 100 million neurons
similar to what dogs
have in their brain.
This neurology is
in communication
with the microbiome,
or colonies of bacteria
in the gut that are integral
to our health and even
our impulses.
It is believed by
ayahuasca shamans
that the real medicine
is not the brew itself.
>>ZACH POITRA:
And, in the jungle,
if you talk to the
Mithros and they say,
oh, you want to
study the medicine?
Dieta, dieta, dieta.
They don't say, ayahuasca,
ayahuasca, ayahuasca.
>>TERENCE MCKENNA:
What they say,
if you really get
down with them,
is that the diet is everything.
And that you're a tourist, and
you're here for a few weeks,
and, yes, we'll
give you ayahuasca.
But what this is really
about is controlling diet
over a period of
months, even years,
and taking a regular
regimen of this stuff
and transforming yourself into
some kind of other person.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>BEN: So what does this dieta,
or diet, really do to our body?
What does this
food actually mean
about changing our microbiome?
If you look at these
foods in the dieta,
they're high in fiber.
High-fiber foods are
called prebiotics.
Now, the difference between
a probiotic bacterial strain
and a prebiotic, prebiotics
are simply food with high fiber
and the right kinds
of chemical compounds
within them to
feed the microbes.
So, literally, prebiotics
are food for our microbiome.
We maybe don't eat enough fiber.
It's just a guess.
But if you don't, you
may not be allowing
the optimal environment in
your gut for these microbes
to survive and keep you healthy.
Now let's take a look at
some other modern lifestyle
elements that are truly
damaging the microbiome.
Some of them are antibiotics,
NSAIDS, over-the-counter meds,
painkillers, cosmetics, hand
sanitizers, house cleaning
products, chemical shampoos,
sugars, conventional meats
and animal products,
refined gluten, alcohol,
food additives, pesticides,
fungicides, Monsanto's Roundup,
glyphosates, and stress.
So I've heard a
lot of people say,
does this mean you can't
have fun because it's not
good for your microbes?
Well, no.
There are still even
some alcoholic beverages
that you can enjoy.
If you take a look
at this one book,
"Wild Fermentation"
by Sandor Ellix Katz.
She shows that there are many
different ways to ferment foods
where the bacterial
strains are the very reason
for the fermentation and
improving your microbiome.
So good microbes actually
help you stay healthier.
They help you detox.
They help create the right
amount of metabolites
and the right amount of
nutrition inside the body.
They're also good for
your mental health.
There's a book, "The
Psychobiotic Revolution"
by Scott C. Anderson,
showing that there
are certain strains of
probiotics that are actually
good for your mental health
just as, if not better than,
the pharmaceuticals that
are out there on the market.
But I caution you, not all
probiotics are created equal.
If you go into the
supermarket and you simply
get yogurt, or kombucha,
or kimchi, and sauerkraut,
these probiotics may be
good for your digestion,
but it does not compare to
the massive amounts of strains
that we need for all of
the biochemical processes
in the body.
So you're not going to
find in most supermarkets
really good probiotic strains.
You're going to have to do
a little bit deeper digging.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, how did our ancient
ancestors stay healthy?
They didn't have access
to the supermarkets
or online being able to buy
the best probiotic strains, so
what did they do?
Well, our ancient ancestors
moved through the natural world
far more than we do.
And the natural world was
far different back then.
There's microbes in the soil,
and they were constantly
touching the earth,
touching nature.
So, truly, this may be the
way that they stayed healthy.
But then you have
to ask yourself,
is our modern society divorcing
us from this form of nature,
from touching the earth, and
from gaining these microbes
to keep us healthier?
Because, mind you, in
one teaspoon of soil,
you'll find just
as many microbes
as there are people
on this planet.
So now let's take a deeper
look at these microbes.
Let's see what Compton Rom has
to say about it on an episode
of "Open Minds" with
Regina Meredith,
in an episode called
"Life-Giving Microbes Within."
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
So are we their host
or are they our host?
>>COMPTON ROM: Right,
we are their host.
If you think that
way, then you'll
start to create a paradigm
shift in your body.
So I've come up
with this new way
of thinking about the
microbes in our gut, which
we call our gastrointestinal
tract or our GI tract.
And, frequently, when
we relabel things,
we tend to subconsciously think
differently about those things.
Well, I would like to
think as the microbes
as our little
computers in our gut.
And they're the ones
making all of our vitamins.
The only reason why
we have to take B12
exogenously is because we
don't make enough in our gut.
But there's a lot of microbes
that make B12 in our gut.
If we pack more of
these microbes--
I mean, B12 we don't
have to take B12.
And you can be vegan and
plant based all you want.
You just have to have
the proper microbes.
You just need to arm
them because they
have the intelligence.
And they have the will to make
our lives a limitless life.
So these are intelligent little
computers living in our gut.
And you can sense that our gut
is like one big condominium
complex of 90
trillion organisms.
>>BEN: The real parallel
here is nanotechnology,
these microbial-sized
computers, these little robots.
There's a lot of predictions
about what this technology can
do for us, how it can
improve our health,
how it can actually work better
than the microbes in our gut.
Many people are very
skeptical about this.
There are actually
predictions that range
from these
self-replicating nanorobots
to produce food and diamonds
all the way to devouring
the entire earth because
they can't stop replicating.
So is this an issue?
Should we worry about this
kind of a technology overtaking
all the natural
biological technology that
already exists inside our gut?
Let's take a look at a film
called "How to Live Forever--
Results May Vary."
>>RAY KURZWEIL:
15 years from now,
we're really going to have the
fruits of this biotechnology
revolution where we can
very dramatically reprogram
the information processes
that run in our bodies.
We're going to be
able to add new genes,
turn off genes, really
reprogram who we are.
And we'll have not
just designer babies
but designer baby boomers.
Computers that are now in your
pocket will be blood-cell size.
They'll be very intelligent.
And we'll have millions
of these nanorobots,
nanobots going through
our bloodstream,
keeping us healthy from inside,
going inside our brains,
interacting directly with
our biological neurons,
and really extending who we
are, and putting our brains
on the internet,
giving us access
to vast resources of
knowledge, memory,
problem-solving capability.
>>BEN: There's many
different speculations
of where technology
should go, but the thing
we have to ask
ourselves is, what
is optimal for the human being?
Can we even wrap our minds
around the things that we need?
In the 1900s, where science
was really advanced,
we still believed we needed
to eliminate all bacteria.
It wasn't until
decades later that we
realized this was causing many
adverse health side effects.
Part of the mystery of
life is taking a look
around at what already exists.
These biological organisms,
where did they come from?
Some bacteria and
some fungal strains
can survive interspace travel.
Very incredible.
So this planet may have been
seeded from another planet.
So the whole holobiont theory
may not even be Gaia itself.
It may not just be this planet.
It could be the entire universe.
So we have to ask
ourselves, what
are we working towards with all
of our technological advances?
I don't believe that
technology is a bad thing.
I want to put
things into balance.
The one thing that I
would like us to remember
is that technology
comes from our minds
whereas these microbes
comes from somewhere else.
And we can't really
conceive of who
or what put them into
motion in the same way
that we don't even know where
we come from, why we're here,
who we truly are.
So if we can put technology
into the service of us answering
these questions and
answering the questions,
what is optimal for human life?
What is optimal for
the planet itself?
Then I truly believe
that this technology
in tandem with our
own intelligence
and all the microbes and
their ancient intelligence
can be put together in
service of this planet,
on this path of unlocking our
deepest human potential, not
just individually
but as a collective.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Just for one week, I'd
like you to eliminate
red meat, highly processed
foods, caffeine, and alcohol.
Now, after eliminating
these things,
I'd like you to supplement
with more fruits, veggies
with high fiber,
berries, nuts, and seeds.
And once you do
that, once you make
this change in your
diet, every single day,
I'd like you to
meditate for 20 minutes.
I'd like you to focus on the gut
microbiome, all these microbes
in your gut, these
little computers,
as Compton Rom calls them.
And as you connect
with these microbes,
ask them for some assistance.
And don't disempower
yourself believing that you
don't know how to do this.
Your microbes know.
What I'd like you
to ask them for
is to begin eliminating some
of the plaque and the pathogens
that exist in your gut.
Not too much, not too
fast because that'll
bring on a healing crisis.
Simply enough to
improve your health.
And if you carry this on until
next week when I see you,
you will have literally changed
your body from the inside out.
So I want to thank you
so much for joining me
in this special episode.
And I'll see you around
next time on "Limitless."
[MUSIC PLAYING]